% --------------- 12 POINT FONT -------------------------------
\documentclass[12pt]{article}
% --------------- 10 POINT FONT FOR CAPTIONS ------------------
\usepackage[font=footnotesize]{caption}
% --------------- NY TIMES FONT -------------------------------
\usepackage{times}
% --------------- 1 INCH MARGINS ------------------------------
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
% --------------- LINE SPACING --------------------------------
\usepackage{setspace}
\singlespacing
%\doublespacing
% --------------- SMALL SECTION TITLES ------------------------
\usepackage[tiny,compact]{titlesec}
% --------------- MATH PACKAGES -------------------------------
\usepackage{amsmath,amsthm,amssymb}
% --------------- Formatting ----------------------------------
\setlength{\parskip}{\baselineskip}
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\begin{document}
% --------------- TITLE AND NAME ------------------------------
\begin{center}
\underline{\bf Personal Statement - Steven Walton}\\
\end{center}
From a young age I have always been interested in the sciences and engineering.
I grew up on sci-fi books and Star Trek. After I had destroyed a lot of things
in our house, attempting to figure out how they worked, my dad started handing
me broken things and challenging me to fix them before he bought replacements. I
have always had a strong desire to understand how everything works, from the
microscopic and mundane to the large and exciting areas. 

When I applied to university I was accepted as an aerospace engineer. I wanted
to explore the stars and thought that this would be the best way to make that
dream a reality. Before the semester was even over I had changed my degree to
Physics and working on a research project with the physics chair. I was more
interested in the toolbox that Physics gives to understand the world than
strictly building things. In experimental physics I found a nice balance between
doing hands applications and trying to understand things from a very basic
level. This passion continued to grow and I started taking on more projects from
other professors. 

My passion for the stars led to a professor asking me to help
with running the school's telescope and getting involved in outreach programs.
Our university would run science events a few times a year for students and
members of the community. We'd do events mainly around astronomical events like
solar eclipses, the Venus transit, and lunar eclipses. During the day events we
would set up a lot of different physics experiments that would get community
members interested in science and talk about the individual phenomena being
demonstrated. At night events we would bring out laser pointers and tell some of
the history and legends surrounding constellations. From these experiences I
developed a passion for teaching and became a TA for several of the physics
classes. I took a passion to trying to design lessons that would challenge
students but also keep them excited and engaged. I also found that his resulted
in me having a deeper understanding of material and caused me to approach
problems from different perspectives. 

In undergrad I also got professors to give me extra access to different labs so
that I could do research on my interests during my free time. Though the
kindness of these professors I developed a deep passion for research. I felt
that this access gave me the time to really dig into problems and concentrate on
solving problems. The free reign gave me the ability to explore topics that I
would not have been able to during classes and I believe helped develop my
methods to solving complex problems. 

While in my undergrad I started programming a lot more. I had had a few
introductions to programming and computer science before, but had never had to
write anything complicated before. With some of the research the professors had
given me I had to start writing complicated code and gain a deeper understanding
of how programming works. At this point I found programming interesting but it
was a means to an end. 

After graduating I obtained a job in Tennessee to work at a rocket company.
There I was able to work on low level research in conjunction with NASA and the
University of Tennessee Knoxville. While there I wrote and won a Phase I NASA
STTR proposal. My employers gave me the lead position on the project, where I
was in charge on planning, running the experiments, and handling the
communication with our University partner (University of Tennessee Knoxville).
My success in this directly lead to Phase II funding and a continuation of this
work. A large part of this work was performing computational simulations and
then building and testing the resulting materials that the simulations predicted
would have the best performance. This was my first time working with large and
complex simulation code and I found that I really enjoyed it. I found that
programming really resonates with the way I think and I found it exciting to
build simulations that made real world predictions and that I was making real
contributions to science. 

With a few years of work under my belt I decided that I wanted to further
continue down the path of the intersection of computer science and the physical
sciences. There were new topics that I had been excited about and teaching
myself but felt that this would be more efficient if I could get a mentor that
could help guide me to the right problems and refine my abilities. I found the
HPC visualization at the University of Oregon (UO) and applied for a PhD program,
where I was accepted and have been a student for a year. 

While at UO I have been able to work on scientific visualization projects. I
believe my broad skill set has has been added value to our research group as I
can help bridge communication between the domain scientists and the
visualization experts. Through my current advisor I have had the opportunity to
work at two Department of Energy (DoE) National Labs: Oak Ridge National Lab
(ORNL) and Lawrence Livermore National Lab (LLNL). I got the first internship at
ORNL the summer before I entered my PhD program. This gave me my first real
introduction into HPC and how the environment worked. During my second summer I
was given the opportunity to work at LLNL and given the freedom to pursue my own
interests. Here I was able to improve both my understanding in machine learning
and visualizations in HPC. Over the summer I attempted to interpolate scientific
data through machine learning, the project described within. There were some
successes and failures in this, but I gained a better understanding of how to
approach the problem and what tasks need to be solved within. Through my
experiences here I believe I would be most happy working either in academia or
at a lab, continuing research and helping mentor new generations of scientists. 

\textbf{Intellectual Merit}
%
With my broad background and strong skills in mathematics I believe that I have
what is needed to complete this project. My background in physics gives me the
proper math background to understand modern machine learning techniques. My
background in simulation helps me understand the needs of domain scientists.
Having a mentor who is an expert in the visualization domain gives me the
resources I have so far needed, and will continue to need, to understand
visualization at the HPC level. I believe that my background and my existing
support structure give me the tools that I need to complete the proposed
research.

\textbf{Broader Impacts}
%
I not only have experience in teaching, but have enjoyed the opportunities that
I have had to do so. An aspect that I greatly appreciate about my current
research group is that there is a large focus on communication skills. Not only
skills of how to communicate ideas between scientists in different domains, but
to larger audiences. I believe that it is becoming increasingly important that
all scientists become better communicators. Specifically I think we need to
learn how to better explain our research to the general public and the
importance of that work. Not only do I think it helps us get funding for our
work, but helps get more people into science, and helps the world become more
scientifically friendly. 

I also think it is important for science to be done in the open, especially when
it is publicly funded. In this effort I try to write about my own work and open
source it through online media such as GitHub. I believe open source is both
good for the scientific community as well as the public. It helps the scientific
community reproduce and check work by other scientists. It also helps the public
by making the science available to everyone. 

\end{document}
